---
layout: default
title: "Editorial: Lessons"
---

I went to Colorado State University for my college career.  It was an okay institution, I'd say.  It had all the failings of a modern American college - tuition constantly on the rise, fraternity scandals, underage drinking, and overeworked teachers - but on the whole, it did what was promised, and provided an education both in the form of intellectual learning through classwork and social learning in the form of interaction out in the real (or at least real-ish) world.  I started in biochemistry, moved to music education, and then finally music composition throughout my tenure at CSU, and I learned a lot about all three, but perhaps more importantly, I gained quite a bit of maturity.

The lesson of maturity isn't one that comes easily, and the forms that it takes are often veiled in the form of strife, struggle, and disappointment.  Of course, maturity isn't something specific to university, not by a long shot, but a structured institution such as that is almost built to put you into situations that make you struggle, situations that disappoint.  For instance, as I worked toward my music degree, I had the pleasure of taking part in a few masterclasses with some relatively famous contemporary composers.  One told me that I should pick a different major and give up on composition, and the other threatened our whole studio with a lawsuit for releasing our compositions for free.  My first instructor defrauded me by making me pay for lessons out-of-pocket while my tuition paid for those very same lessons.

It wasn't all hard times, of course.  Learning that much about music for a few years was really fun, and still means a lot to me to this day.  I had a wonderful relationship with my later composition teachers, who all stood up for students as equals.  Dr. David, the composition professor who shepherded me through the latter half of my stay in the composition department, was a good friend and an even better mentor - I learned more about orchestration from him than I did in the class dedicated to orchestration.

University, as a time-frame in my life, was formative for ways that extend beyond just school.  Throughout high school, I spent quite a bit of time online, interacting with other furries.  I did so for a variety of reasons, as anyone would, but the first and foremost among them was for comfort.  High school was hard, and I realize now that I wasn't looking for any deep, long-lasting relationships (the fact that I wound up with several is, without a doubt, a blessing), so much as for reassurance that, as I grew up, things would settle into a normal life.  Others lived with divorced parents; others lived with relationships that worked out poorly; others lived through the struggles of burgeoning sexual orientation and solidifying gender identity.  These were all things that I could do as well.

Once I made my way into college, comfortable in my new-found freedom, I found myself at a bit of a loss.  After all, I'd learned so much in high school about how to interact with the world, what more could there possibly be to learn?  And yet, here I was confronted with the fact that I had learned so little.  I was failing chemistry, and I wasn't doing much better in biology, both of which I'm sure you'll appreciate are quite important in biochemistry.

Changing from biochem to music made me happier overall, but it was not free of struggles, as I described.  Add into that a questioning of gender and sexuality, and for a few years there, I was a real mess.  That I spent seven years in college makes sense, I think.  I have many complex opinions on the American university system, which I'll keep off of a primarily furry site.  Needless to say, the process of growing up - and that's really what I was doing - took much longer than the four years my advisor kept hounding me about; and that's *without* a full class-load.

The transition away from college was a whole lot smoother.  College had seen a few more serious relationships, but now I was engaged to be married, I owned a house (or, well, half of one) and a dog (or, well, half of one).  The one thing that had truly changed in all of this, however, was me.  The move from university to a working life wasn't met with the previous emotions: confusion at the change, indignity at being affronted by life.  I found myself relishing the challenge of finding a job, despite my previous contract having run out, and I found the challenges of married life added to the strength of the relationship rather than working against it.

The lesson, I found, is not the surface aspect of any one of these things I encountered.  It's not that people will defraud you, though they will, and it's not that your relationships will end, though they will.  The lesson is maturity.  It is how to be a person in a world which is continually changing, both for and against you, so that you can do your level best.

This, I think, is where furry has the potential to shine for a lot of us.

Furry is a place of hard times and also of friendship.
    (in furry)
    (hard times and friendship)

Take the act of creation and the act of sharing.  An artist will work toward a defined goal, come out with a piece to be shared (whether they feel it's done or not - as an artist, 'done' is often a foreign concept), share it with the world at large.  Their representation of something within their head, or perhaps their interpretation of an idea within a commissioner's head.

If you are that creator, know that each of these creations - foxes, wolves, sergals, and dragons alike - is a step on your own path to maturity.  It's not that you will create a universally loved image or story, because you certainly won't, and it's not that you will get a comment for everthing that you create.  It is the act of creation that betters you, as a creator, not the act of recognition.  

If you are a consumer, know that each of the creations you view, read, or participate in is something valuable - even furry art, as I have seen and read some truly magnificent things within the context of the fandom.  It's not that you will like all art, because you certainly won't, and it's not that you will get noticed for every comment you leave, because you definitely won't.  It is the fact that you are partaking in something which is broadening your view of the world, making you a better person for having seen it.  The act of leaving comments, of purchasing commissions and products such as books, prints, and so on, is the way that you give back to the creator for the work they've done.

    (the common thread is creation - re characters)

Furry is where you can mature in an understanding environment, so long as that is the environment we make of it.  It is because we're taking part in a culture, subculture, or community that focuses on the betterment of its members through their own works, that focuses on the betterment of others through the appreciation of itself.

After my senior recital, the capstone of a composition degree, I put down music.  Although I wish I hadn't done so, I can't argue with the many reasons that went into that decision.  My senior recital was a mess on all sides: my performers didn't rehearse, I didn't push my them hard enough, the department didn't support me, and my professor was stretched too thin.  After that fiasco, and all I had gone through in the name of music, walking into a tech job where I could get to work doing good things right away was too alluring.  This was the last lesson that I learned.  That I'm still learning.

A while back, as several issues in my life came to a head, I put writing aside.  Again, the reasons were all good, but I still wish that I hadn't.  I shifted most of the burden of maintaining \[adjective\]\[species\] onto JM (who has done a delightful job) while I sorted myself out, and I think I've come out the better for it.

I'm just now picking music back up.  I left it for some good reasons, and I think that I'm picking it up for the right ones.  Instead of working towards my senior recital and some sort of eventual, intangible fame, I'm working towards small, clearly defined goals, such as the completion of individual pieces.  I've taken techniques I've learned from working in the real world and applied them to the art of composition.  The creative aspects are still there, sure, but I'm working on becoming a disciplined composer, just like how I've become a disciplined programmer.

The same goes with writing.  I'm starting to structure my writing attitude along the same lines as composing, which is to say along similar lines that I take with developing software.  It still sounds silly even to my ears, but having this attitude - hell, having any attitude at all - towards the work I do helps to not only keep myself honest, but helps me to be earnest in my activities.  I will likely not get back up to the article-a-week I maintained earlier, and I'm learning to think of that as okay.  My writing suffered under such restrictions, and I feel that, in a lot of ways, I make a better editor-in-chief and data-vix for \[a\]\[s\] than I do a weekly contributor.

This isn't a plea for praise, nor is it begging for sympathy, but rather an exhortation to be earnest in what you do and your appraisal of yourself, what you say to others, and how you interact within the fandom.  There are lots of ways to reach maturity, and being earnest in what you do and enjoy is one of the best.

The number one lesson that I've picked up through school, work, and life is something that I memorized in middle school: "the only constant is change".  It's trite, it doesn't add much to a conversation, but when you sit down and take a look at where your life has led you, where it will lead you next, and how exactly you fit in with the constantly changing world around you, the more you realize that there is no such thing as stasis but by a great force of will.  There is no staying the same in the world.

Take a look around you, at how you interact with the fandom that you (assumingly) hold dear.  How do you see the friends in your life changing?  How do you see the art-styles changing, and your own tastes in art changing with them?  How do you see the demographics of the fandom changing?  Do you see yourself being left behind, or do you feel that you're ahead of the curve?  Is there room for the *new* in your life?  Is there respect for the *old*?

Do the things you love to do as well as the things you have to do.  Be the person you are and strive to be the person you need to be.  Be an ecstatic furry and be a true part of the world around you.  Do all of these things, and do them earnestly.  Be well.
